+++
title = "Experience at Guilin CLI"
date = 2025-05-25
+++

I recently got back from studying Chinese at the school [Guilin
CLI](https://studycli.org/). It was amazing and a life-changing experience, so
I want to write down some of my thoughts about it! This isn't an advertisement
or anything, but if you're learning Chinese I really can't recommend CLI
enough. My Chinese improved faster than it ever had before, especially
conversationally.

## The School

For starters, all classes are one-on-one and you have 3 different teachers each
focusing on a different area:
1. 综合（zōnghé）Comprehensive (10hrs/week): Your standard teach from a
   textbook class.
2. 口语听力（kǒuyǔ tīnglì）Speech & Listening (6hrs/week): Conversation,
   discussion, and periodic outdoor classes in The Real World™.
3. 读写（dúxiě）Reading & Writing (4hrs/week): Story and article reading plus
   short response and/or essay writing.

Classes are 2 hours with a 10 minute break in the middle. Classes are also
taught almost entirely in Chinese, as long as you are capable of understanding.

Since everything is one-on-one, the teachers customize the classes to your
goals. And they coordinate so well it really feels like the teacher's all share
a brain.

## My Experience

For background, I started learning Chinese in May of 2023 and I went to CLI for
3 weeks from April 14th to May 2nd, 2025. When I started learning, I had an
in-person private tutor from [Sishu Mandarin](https://sishumandarin.com/) for a
year and a half, which was incredibly helpful. After that, I self-studied for
about 5 months while saving up for CLI. During that period of self-study I also
took an enjoyable but not very helpful class from the [China Institute in
America](https://chinainstitute.org/).

When I got to China, I was around an HSK 3-4 level so about an A2 advanced
beginner level. I could order food, understand shows like Peppa Pig with
moderate effort, and listen to basic instructions. So I could survive in day to
day life, but if any interaction deviated from "perfect" (like maybe I made a
mistake or something was sold out) I would really start to struggle, and I
couldn't hold a conversation whatsoever.

## My Takeaways

Aside from the language learning, this was an extremely humbling experience.

The world is so much bigger than the America I grew up with. There are so many
fascinating kinds of people I didn't even know could exist. There is so much I
don't know about Chinese culture and language, and even more I don't know about
other cultures and languages.

It was also very interesting, as a white American, to experience being a
minority in a place for the first time. People stared and I could overhear them
talk about me. Not in a hateful way or anything that made me feel unsafe, but
it was a very interesting experience.

Also, although my Chinese is very bad, it was cool to talk with and have
experiences with all these people in another language.

## Q&A

Finally, just some scattered thoughts.

> How much should I have to know before I take classes here?

If you're going for a short period of time (<3 months), I think coming in
around HSK 3 level is ideal. At that level, you can already have classes mostly
in Chinese and are able to survive and get food without relying on someone
else.

But if you're going for a longer period of time, honestly you can show up with
nothing. There were some people at the school who came in with no knowledge of
Chinese and were doing phenomenal, better than me despite only learning for 5
months. But those first couple months seemed really brutal.

> Should I get a VPN?

Yeah probably. I went in with just a Honk Kong SIM so I could bypass the Great
Firewall via cell service but on WiFi I had to deal with it. I thought it would
be a cool immersion experience, and in some ways it was, but it was mostly just
annoying.

---

The school has this ingenious format where you effectively have 3 private
tutors. Each teacher has one of the following roles:
1. 综合（zōnghé）Comprehensive: The teacher you meet with every day. They
   teach from the textbook of your choice and thoroughly go over grammar and
   vocabulary.
2. 口语听力（kǒuyǔ tīnglì）Spoken/Listening: Meet with 3 days a week. They
   focus on conversation and as a result this class can be basically anything.
   My classes varied from sitting in class discussing movies to going to a tea
   ceremony together. Some people will literally just go shopping for this
   class!
3. 读写（dúxiě）Reading/Writing: Meet with 2 days a week. For me since I didn't
   care much about writing, we read stories/news and then discussed and
   analyzed them. Other people did extensive writing practice ranging from
   character drills to essay writing.

Classes are 2 hours with a 10 minute break in the middle. You have 4 hours of
class a day, for a total of 20 hours per week. (Though you can
increase/decrease your class load if you want.)

Since everything is 1-on-1, the teachers customize the classes to your goals.

For me, my primary goal was to get better at conversation and to learn more
about Chinese history and culture. So as a result, in my spoken class we talked
a lot about modern Chinese culture, including movies, food, schooling, and
social media. And in my reading/writing class, we typically read (simplified)
ancient stories or explanations of holidays and then discussed them.

But I know other students who focused on reading/writing had their classes
filled with handwriting, composing written essays/stories, and explanations of
how Chinese characters work. I even know one student focused on ancient
Chinese!

TODO: Mention how everything was done in Chinese and some teachers couldn't
speak English well.

## Background

For background, I started learning Chinese on May 1st, 2023 and I went to CLI
for 3 weeks from April 14th to May 2nd, 2025. When I started learning, I had an
in-person private tutor from [Sishu Mandarin](https://sishumandarin.com/) for a
year and a half, which was incredibly helpful. After that, I self-studied for
about 6 months while saving up for CLI. During that time I also took an
enjoyable but not very helpful class from the [China Institute in
America](https://chinainstitute.org/).

When I arrived in Guilin, I was around an HSK 3-4 level. I had finished the HSK
3 book, but not yet started the HSK 4A book. But because of my time
self-studying, I had a relatively large vocabulary compared to HSK 3.

## dump from notes

# school
the school was great. the teachers were very helpful. the format is ingenious. you have 3 teachers and all classes are one-on-one. As a result, the classes are perfectly tailored to your interests and you bring your own textbook. For me, I used the HSK4 book and told them I was primarily interested in being able to converse in chinese and being able to read, and they structured the class such that a huge portion of it was me discussing with the teacher about culture and life or we would read a passage/story and discuss it. This was great and exactly what I wanted. I know other students came here focusing on writing or even one who wanted to learn a lot of classical chinese, and the school accommodated that as well.

also the teachers communicate with each other incredibly well. you have 3 teachers but they communicate and prepare classes collaboratively so sometimes it feels like just one teacher. I had an outdoor class with one teacher where I saw monkeys and my other teacher's brought it up even tho I never mentioned it. Also multiple times teacher A would tell me to ask teacher B if we could discuss this, but when I asked teacher B they clearly knew I was going to ask that and had already prepared part of a lesson around that.

there are two people: the normies and the drifters

# me

this china trip has taught me my chinese is way worse and also a little better than i thought it was

i think on average it's been a humbling experience

the main takeaways are
(a) i can actually function and learn in a class taught almost entirely in chinese (i didn't think i could)
(b) a lot of basic words and phrases actually really trip me up (someone told me 请坐, please sit, and i just had no clue what they said. all numbers and directions require me to pause and really think about what they just said)
(c) i can handle accents surprisingly well
(d) my speaking is way worse than i thought it was (i normally talk to people where i can just drop an English word in, but when i can't do that it's actually really hard)

oh my god two middle aged women just took turns taking pictures with me at this museum

anyway, that experience really made me realize that not only do i look exotic here, i also sound exotic, and dress exotically

# good decisions

i think i came here at around the right level. starting at HSK4 let me start taking classes in chinese, successfully stumble my way thru ordering food, understand random staff members, and stumble my way through conversations with chinese people. if you come in knowing nothing, the first month will be incredibly brutal because you'll really struggle to order food, and a lot of the teachers and staff at CLI will struggle to communicate with you. That being said, some students came in knowing nothing and seemed to learn incredibly quickly, but i think i would only do that if i was going to stay for at LEAST 3 months

# bad decisions

i wanted to review before this school, but had very little motivation 

i got a hong kong number instead of a chinese phone number + VPN. this wasn't the worst idea because 3HK is pretty affordable and it was pretty easy to set up. but i couldn't for example set up 美团 (food delivery) because i couldn't send or receive texts in mainland china. also because i used the phone number as data, if i wanted to watch youtube (which has my chinese learning videos) or access my bank account, i had to use data which was a little annoying


