---
title: "E 102: Engineering in the 21st Century"
teacher: "Ms. Hailey Queen"
semester: "2018-19 Spring"
---

# Administrivia

* Goal of E-101: Show engineering as a profession, the design cycle, basic
  problem solving.
* Goals of E-102: Specific the grand challenges engineers face, how
  engineers tackle those, and how those challenges impact history, politics,
  society, etc.
    * This is a GEP (interdisciplinary perspectives).
* We only meet once a week on Thursday!
* 1 Free absence allowed. After -5% per class (for unexcused)

## Professor

* Name: Hailey Queen
* Email: haqueen@ncsu.edu
* Office hours on syllabus

## TA

* Name: Lexi Kloeppel
* Major: Chemical Engineering Major, Biomanufacturing Minor - Senior
* Email: lrkloeppel@ncsu.edu
* Takes care of absences

## Grades

| Weight | Component     | Details                   |
|--------|---------------|---------------------------|
| 5%     | Participation | Kahoot                    |
| 15%    | Homework      | Moodle Assignments (14)   |
| 20%    | Midterm Exam  | In class, closed notes    |
| 15%    | Paper         | Based on Grand Challenges |
| 15%    | Team Poster   | Based on Grand Challenges |
| 30%    | Final Exam    | Comprehensive             |

# Grand Challenges

* 14 Engineering Grand Challenges
* Founded by National Academy of Engineers (NAE)
* Created in 2008
* National Academy of Engineers: A large body of engineers that helps set
  ethics standards, promote engineering concerns, and set goals (the Grand Challenges)
  * Established 1964
  * Members elected by current members based on research (~2000)
    * NC State has 14 :)
  * Part of National Academy of Sciences founded by Abraham Lincoln

## Categories

* Health
  * Advance health informatics
  * Engineer better medicines
  * Reverse-engineer the brain
* Security
  * Prevent nuclear terror
  * Secure cyberspace
* Sustainability
  * Make solar energy affordable
  * Provide energy from fusion
  * Developer carbon sequestration methods
  * Manage the nitrogen cycle
  * Provide access to clean water
* Joy of Living
  * Enhance virtual reality
  * Advance personalized learning
  * Engineer the tools for scientific discovery

## Enhancing Virtual Reality

Virtual reality is all about simulating reality so we can have more control in
*education*, *training*, *entertainment*, and even more scenarios.

Currently, the main components are **goggles/headsets**,
**headphones/earbuds**, and **movement sensors**. In the future,
**omnidirectional treadmills**, **touch simulators**, and possibly other tools
will become part of the standard VR toolset.

This has connections to [personalizing learning](#Advance Personalized Learning)

* Important People:
  * Jaron Lanier

## Advance Personalized Learning

* Big Ideas:
  * **People are different**
  * **Motivation**
  * Let students move at their own rate.
  * We collect more data to figure out how students learn, what they are
    learning, and how to better help them. (machine learning and data
    science???)
  * Get quick feedback from immediate assessment to send help people.
  * Figure out what students are interested in and use that to help keep them
    interesting.
* *Why is it important?*
  * We need educated people for almost everything.
  * Our education system kinda sucks.
  * We have a shit ton of people drop out.
* Connections:
  * Personalized Medicine: Using data.
  * Reverse Engineer the Brain: How does it work?
  * Enhancing Virtual Reality: Cool new way to teach!

## Carbon Sequestration

* Chemical Engineering's most important and personal grand challenges.
* Scrubber: Removes $CO_2$ from gas.
  * Types: Wet gas scrubber.
* US Expected Cost from Climate Change: 20\$ trillion.
  * 2nd highest in the world.
* Current Solutions: Shift energy sources, land management, carbon injection, biochar/biomass, rock
  storage.
* Current Issues: Which solution should we do? God it's so expensive. No solution is very good so
  far.
  * Carbon Tax: Companies lobby against it because they don't want to spend it.

Greenhouse Gas Emissions Diagram
: [](ghg_emissions.jpg)

## Manage the Nitrogen Cycle

* Sustainability: Maintaining balance of resource use in environment.
* Things that Add Nitrogen to Ground: Legumes (nitrogen fixing root nodules), fertilizer,
  nitrifying bacteria.
* Things that Remove Nitrogen from Ground: Denitrifying bacteria, soil leeching (water), plant
  roots.
* *How does nitrogen get added by humans?* Primarily creating nitrogen based fertilizer and
  disrupting ecosystems (killing nitrogen providing legumes).
* *Why is the nitrogen cycle important?* Because nitrous oxide is a very strong greenhouse gas and
  nitrogen can get into water (from runoff) and fuck up aquatic ecosystems (fish kills,
  eutrophication, algal blooms).

Nitrogen Cycle Diagram
: [](nitrogen_cycle.gif)

## Reverse-Engineering the Brain

* Impacts:
  * Cure/help neurological diseases.
  * Advance computing.
  * Understanding humans.
  * Advances in prosthetics.

## Health Informations

* Health Informations: The acquisition, management, and use of data in health and medical setting.
* Very closely related with engineering better medicines. *How can you create better medicine if
  you don't have info?*

## Preventing Nuclear Terror

* Currently, our "best" method of preventing nuclear terror is Mutually Assured
* Destruction (MAD), which is a shit method.
* Three parts to using nuclear weapons.
  * Obtaining nuclear materials - *The hardest one*.
    * Uranium 235, Plutonium 239 are used because they are fissile (can sustain
      chain reactions).
    * You get plutonium 239 from a breeder reactor (creates it) and uranium 235
      from enrichment.
  * Obtaining a detonation method.
  * Delivering the weapons.
* Solutions:
  * Systems for tracking nuclear materials and weapons.
  * Nuclear car wash.
  * Computer modeling of nuclear attacks to guide warning systems and clean up.

### Anantomy of Nuclear Weapons/Reactor

* For a weapon to work, a reaction needs to be supercritical.
* Subcritical: Not enough neutrons are released to sustain the reaction. *Dies
  out.*
* Critical: Just enoug neutrons to release to sustain the reaction. *Self
  sustains.*
* Supercritical: More neutrons are released than need to sustain the reaciton.
  *Goes boom.*
* Types of Nuclear Assemblies / Detonators:
  * Gun type: A conventional explosive to the side of two nuclear pieces
    explodes and pushes the two pieces together. Can only be used for uranium
    235.
  * Implosion type: A conventional explosive surrounds the nuclear material and
    explodes, compressing the nuclear material. Can be used for everything.
* Enriching uranium 235: You use mass separation. This is normally done now by
  gaseous centrifuging, since uranium 235 is lighter than normal uranium 239.
* Breeding plutonium 239: Basically there is a series of nuclear processes that
  convert uranium 238 to plutonium 239.
  * Normal reactors create plutonium 240, which can't be used for nuclear
    weapons because it blows itself up before it goes supercritical.

## Restore Urban Infrastructure

* *Why security?* Urban infrastructure impacts the safety/stability of society as a whole.
  * Think Flint, Michigan and the Hyatt Regency walkway collapse.
* Issues:
  * US gets a D+ from the American Society of Civil Engineers
* *Why is it hard?*
  * It's really expensive
  * It isn't sexy.
  * People don't see the benefit.

# Majors

## Biomedical Engineering

* Focuses: biomaterials, biomechanical,

## Chemical Engineering

* AKA: Process engineering.
* *Not always in manufaturing.*
* Often used as a spring board to medical/dental school.
* 7 concentrations.
* Research: Biofuels, biomolecular, complex fluids, nanoscience, polymers, engineering,
  computational, kinetics/electrochemical.

### Jobs

* Traditional: Chemical processing, petroleum refining, paper production, synthetic materials,
  textiles, food processing, brewing.
* Emerging: Pharmaceutical, nanotechnology, bioengineering, green engineering, microelectronics,
  alternative energy.
* NC State pay after school: ~69,500\$

## Industrial and System Engineering

* Determine the most effective ways to use people, resources, information,
  energy, etc.
    * Quality, efficiency, cost
* *Essentially fancy management, planning, and HR*
* **Relevant Fields:** Management and planning of manufacturing, hospitals, and
  also fucking Disney

### Impacts

* The moving assembly line
    * Effective use of labor resources
    * Increased speed
    * Increased quality
* The widespread adoption of cars (boo!)
    * Model T: 93 Minutes and \$290

## Material Science Engineering

* Largest Users of Solar (by raw amount): China > Japan > Germany > US
* Solar Energy ~1% of energy produced
* Focus: Metals, ceramics, polymers, composites, microelectronics
* "Making Stuff: Stronger, Smaller, Cleaner, and Smarter"

## Nuclear Engineering

* Possible Fields: Energy, medicine, medical imaging, military, nuclear terror (politics).
* Related Grand Challenges: Provide energy from fusion, engineer better medicines, reverse-engineer
  the brain, prevent nuclear terror, engineer the tools for discovery.

### Fusion

* Method: Fuse tritium (formed from nuclear reaction Lithium) and deuterium.
* Pros: Creates a lot of energy, extremely clean, very reliable, won't have runaway reactions.
* Cons: It's really fucking hard, it's expensive.

### Fission

* Pros: It creates a lot energy, it produces no carbon emissions, very reliable.
* Cons: It's much cheaper, it can be unsafe, it can have runaway reactions.

### Medical Field

* Single-Photon Emission Computerized Tomography (SPECT): A form of imaging that can better show
  brain-related issues.

## Paper Science and Engineering

* Paper Science and Engineering: Specialization of chemical engineering.
* In the College of Engineering and College of Natural Resources
* Often double major in PSE and CHE
* Lots of hands-on learning.

### Finances

* Highest paid NC State Engineering major.
* 50%-60% of students have a scholarship.

## Civil Engineering

* Deals with design, construction, and maintenance of infrastructure.
* 2nd oldest.
* Subdisciplines:
  * Structural engineering
  * Transportation engineering
  * Geotechnical engineering
  * Construction engineering
  * Water resources and engineering
  * Environmental engineering
* Size: 1000 undergraduates.
