---
title: "MA 225: Foundations of Advanced Mathematics"
teacher: "Dr. Fulp"
semester: "2018-19 Spring"
math: true
---

# Vocabulary

* Axiom: A statement simply accepted to be true.
* Theorem: A statement proved to be true using the axioms.
* Lemma: A small theorem used in a specific proof to make the proof cleaner/easier.
* Proposition: A sentence with one of two truth values.
  * "The sky is blue."
  * "4 divides 5."
* Universe ($\mathcal{U}$): All possible elements within the realm of discussion.
* Open Sentence: A propsoition dependent on a variable within the universe.
* Universal Quantifier ($\forall$): $(\forall x) P(x)$ is true iff the truth set of $P(x)$ is
  $\mathcal{U}$.
* Existential Quantifier ($\exists$): $(\exists x) P(x)$ is true iff the truth set of $P(x)$ is
  non-empty.
* Unique Quantifier ($\exists!$): $(\exists! x) P(x)$ is true iff the truth set of $P(x)$ contains
  only one value.
* Set: A collection of unique elements that cannot contain itself. (Sets can be elements!)
* Argot: The standard human language used to describe logical statements.

# Logical Equivalences

* $P \iff \neg(\neg P)$
* $P \lor Q \iff Q \lor P$ -- Commutative Law
* $P \land Q \iff Q \land P$ -- Commutative Law
* $P \lor (Q \lor R) \iff (P \lor Q) \lor R$ -- Associative Law
* $P \land (Q \land R) \iff (P \land Q) \land R$ -- Associative Law
* $P \land (Q \lor R) \iff (P \land Q) \lor (P \land R)$ -- Distributive Law
* $P \lor (Q \land R) \iff (P \lor Q) \land (P \lor R)$ -- Distributive Law
* $\neg (P \land Q) \iff \neg P \lor \neg Q$ -- DeMorgan's Law
* $\neg (P \lor Q) \iff \neg P \land \neg Q$ -- DeMorgan's Law
* $P \implies Q \iff \neg P \lor Q$
* $\neg (P \implies Q) \iff P \land \neg Q$
* $\neg (P \land Q) \iff P \implies \neg Q$
* $\neg (P \land Q) \iff Q \implies \neg P$
* $(P \iff Q) \iff (P \implies Q) \land (Q \implies P)$
* $P \implies (P \implies R) \iff (P \land Q) \implies R$
* $P \implies (P \land R) \iff (P \implies Q) \land (P \implies R)$
* $(P \land Q) \implies R \iff (P \implies R) \land (Q \implies R)$
* $P \implies Q \iff \neg Q \implies \neg P$ -- Contrapositive
* $\neg [ (\exists x) P(x)] \iff (\forall x)[\neg P(x)]$ -- Quantifiers and Negation
* $\neg [ (\forall x) P(x)] \iff (\exists x)[\neg P(x)]$ -- Quantifiers and Negation

# Set Equivalences

* $A - B = A \bigcup B^c$
* $A \subset B = B^c \subset A^c$
* $(\underset{ A \in \mathcal{A} }{\bigcap} \mathcal{A})^c = \underset{ A \in \mathcal{A} }{\bigcup} A^c$ -- DeMorgan's Law
* $(\underset{ A \in \mathcal{A} }{\bigcup} \mathcal{A})^c = \underset{ A \in \mathcal{A} }{\bigcap} A^c$ -- DeMorgan's Law
* $A \subseteq \underset{A \in \mathcal{A}}{\bigcup}A$
* $\underset{A \in \mathcal{A}}{\bigcap}A \subseteq A$
* If $B \subseteq A$ for all $A \in \mathcal{A}$, then $B \subseteq \underset{A \in \mathcal{A}}{\bigcup} A$
* If $B \subseteq A$ for all $A \in \mathcal{A}$, then $\underset{A \in \mathcal{A}}{\bigcup} A \subseteq B$

# Argot of Logical Statements

* $P \implies Q$
  * $P$ implies $Q$.
  * If $P$, then $Q$.
  * $Q$, if $P$.
  * $P$ only if $Q$.
  * $Q$, when $P$.
  * $Q$ whenever $P$.
  * $P$ is sufficient for $Q$
  * $Q$ is necessary for $P$.
  * $Q$ is a necessary consequent of $P$.
* $P \iff Q$
  * $P$ implies $Q$, and conversely.
  * $P$ if and only if $Q$.
  * $P$ iff $Q$.
  * $P$ is equivalent to $Q$.
  * $P$ is necessary and sufficient for $Q$.
